[Music]
it's hard to imagine that just a couple
of decades ago touchscreens still
sounded like something you'd only see in
a sci-fi movie and look where we are now
they're pretty much everywhere so that
got me to thinking how do touchscreens
work anyway more on that later but first
I'll tell you what surprised me the most
get this
touchscreens already appeared way back
in the 60s in 1965 EA Johnson created
the very first finger driven screen
granted it could process just one touch
at a time so still a long way to the
multi-touch displays of today and it
either registered this touch or not
pretty basic but come on it was the 60s
after all besides even such a simple
technology by today's standards of
course had its takers for example the
idea had been used by British air
traffic controllers till the late 90s
but even though Johnson was the first to
create touchscreen technology these
displays hadn't gained popularity till
the 1970s when the resistive touch
screen was accidentally invented the who
Biddy would it be and what was created
accidentally I'll get into the different
kinds of displays here shortly bear with
me
but this incidental ingenuity happened
in the US where a research team headed
by dr. G Samuel Hearst was studying
atomic physics at the University of
Kentucky in their experiments the
scientists needed to use some equipment
that was so overworked that it was only
available at night you can imagine how
much that inconvenience was slowing down
their progress it was then when dr.
Hearst and his colleagues thought of
using some electrically conductive paper
in their research by using this idea
they eventually created the first
computer touchscreen ever now the
researchers could do tests that had
previously taken days to finish within a
matter of hours
[Music]
further developing on that new
technology scientists at the University
of Toronto invented the first
multi-touch display in the 1980s as for
the very first touchscreen cell phones
they came out a little later in the 90s
now all this time touchscreens were
always pretty hit or miss that is don't
imagine the really cool super fast
finger movements you do on your phone
these days but the technology was
getting better and better so you can
thank these old dinosaur versions for
the incredible screen you have today so
back to the question at hand what's the
magic behind touchscreens we know and
love today if you thought that just one
technology stands behind this swipeable
phenomenon of our time think again in
fact there are more than half a dozen
approaches to make touchscreens work the
two you might be most familiar with are
the resistive and capacitive displays
resistive touchscreens are the simplest
and most commonly used if you've ever
withdrawn cash from an ATM you know what
they are what about that part-time job
you had as a cashier when you were a
teen or each time you sign your name or
just draw a smiley face when you're
checking out at the grocery store though
as point-of-sale screens are also this
time the technology is simple you press
on the screen hard enough and it bends
and resists your touch hence the name
but what happens next the thing is that
a resistive screen consists of two
layers that can conduct electricity but
while one of these layers is resistive
the other is conductive and between them
there are these things called spacers
they're tiny dots that separate the
layers until you touch the screen so to
put it simply an electrical current is
constantly running through the two
layers then all of a sudden your finger
hits the screen the two layers gets
squished together and the electric
current changes the device software
feels a change in this particular spot
and does its work meaning that it
fulfills the function that corresponds
with that place you click on the $20
button instead of the $50 button and the
ATM spits out
box on the one hand resistive
touchscreens are reliable and durable
but on the downside they're pretty hard
to read due to their multiple layers and
the more light falls on the display the
harder it is to make out what's written
there never tried to withdraw cash and
an outdoor ATM on a sunny day forget
about it on top of that you can't zoom
in to see the little print more clearly
unfortunately resistive screens can
handle only one touch at a time so do
you have this type of screen on your
smartphone thank goodness no what you
use to scroll through social media or my
personal favorite hitting snooze over
and over again is a capacitive screen
and its main difference from the
resistive kind is that this screen
doesn't want you to poke it with your
finger Oh No instead the capacitive
screen changes the electrical current
when it comes into contact with anything
that holds an electrical charge and by
that I mean you or rather your skin just
like everything else it consists of
atoms that are negatively and positively
charged capacitive touchscreens are made
from either indium tin oxide or copper
both of these materials keep electrical
charges in super tiny wires with each of
them way thinner than a human hair but
here is where it gets a bit more
complicated the thing is there are two
different kinds of capacitive touch
screens projective and surface
predictive displays use a tight grid of
special sensor chips as for surface
displays they use itsy-bitsy sensors in
the corners as well as a paper thin film
evenly distributed over the screen but
whichever type of capacitive screen you
use as soon as your finger hits the
display it transfers a teeny electrical
charge back to your finger as a result
you have a complete circuit which leads
to a voltage drop in a particular place
on the screen voila the software
analyzes the location of this voltage
drop and follows your command yes I'd
like to snooze for five more minutes
thank you kindly so
ever wondered why your cell phone and
won't respond when you're wearing gloves
the problem is that clothes don't
conduct electricity unless you have
special gloves fitted with conductive
threads of course and what about when
your fingers are kind of wet that causes
problems with your touchscreen for the
opposite reason water conducts
electricity so the screen can't tell
where your finger is touching because
the water is also grabbing some of that
electric charge but like I mentioned
earlier even though these two
touchscreen types are the most popular
they aren't the only ones that exist
today Hey ever heard of an infrared
touchscreen whoa fancy remember those
action movies where the main character
has to steal something from a highly
protected room secured by a grid of
infrared rays touch one of those rays
and you set the alarm off well similar
technology is used in infrared
touchscreens their displays shine
infrared light in front of the screen
kind of like an invisible spider web as
soon as you touch the display your
missions failed just kidding
you'll just interrupt a couple of the
infrared rays and it'll set up a
reaction by analyzing which rays you've
interrupted a microchip in the screen
will then know your intentions most ear
eaters have screens like that by the way
here's one that sounds super fancy
surface acoustic wave touch screens to
detect your finger this technology uses
sound not life fancy functions for its
fancy name the screen creates ultrasonic
sound waves at its edges and they get
reflected back and forth all over its
surface as soon as you touch the screen
you not only disturb the sound beams but
also absorb their energy that's how the
built-in micro chip controller
understands where you've touched the
screen
don't even bother holding this type of
screen up to your ear
these ultrasonic sounds are too
high-pitched for your human ear to hear
if you don't have human ears well that's
another issue one more type of
touchscreens called near field imaging
is so tough that it's suitable for the
most challenging environment
that's why it's widely used in the
military when you move your finger
closer to the screen you change the
glass screens electric field as a result
it immediately recognizes your touch
such technology allows you to control
the screen with the help of a pen stylus
and even while wearing gloves oh by the
way most people don't realize just how
widely used touchscreens are in fact
nowadays it's hard to find a field that
doesn't make use of them airplane stores
banks schools and universities hospitals
you name it also these days with the
help of special devices you can turn
literally any surface be it your desk a
wall or even your skin into a
touchscreen so do you think new types of
touchscreens will appear any time soon
let me know down in the comments if you
learned something new today then give
this video a like and share it with a
friend but hey you don't go touching my
screen just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life
[Music]